LETTERS
Emerging Infectious Diseases • www.cdc.gov/eid • Vol. 13, No. 8, August 2007 1271
Elsa Jourdain,*†
Michel Gauthier-Clerc,*
and Philippe Sabatier†
*Station Biologique de la Tour du Valat, Ar-
les, France; and †Ecole Nationale Vétéri-
naire de Lyon, Marcy l’Etoile, France
References
1. Sengupta R, Rosenschein L, Gilbert M,
Weiller C. Ecoregional dominance in
spatial distribution of avian influenza
(H5N1) outbreaks. Emerg Infect Dis.
2007;13:1269–70.
2. Jourdain E, Gauthier-Clerc M, Bicout DJ,
Sabatier P. Bird migration routes and risk
for pathogen dispersion into western Med-
iterranean wetlands. Emerg Infect Dis.
2007;13:365–72.
3. Olsen B, Munster VJ, Wallensten A,
Waldenstro J, Osterhaus A, Fouchier R.
Global patterns of influenza A virus in
wild birds. Science. 2006;312:384–8.
4. Gauthier-Clerc M, Lebarbenchon C,
Thomas F. Recent expansion of highly
pathogenic avian influenza H5N1: a criti-
cal review. Ibis. 2007;149:202–14.
Address for correspondence: Elsa Jourdain,
Unité Environnement et Prédiction de la Santé
des Populations–Techniques de l’Ingénierie
Médicale et de la Complexité-Informatique,
Unité de Mixte de Recherche 5525, Ecole
Nationale Vétérinaire de Lyon, 1 Ave Bourgelat,
F-69280 Marcy l’Etoile, France; email:
e.jourdain@vet-lyon.fr
In Response: Sengupta et al.
(1) discuss the role of ecoregions in
the distribution of HPAI (H5N1) out-
breaks. Although the concept of ecore-
gions is undoubtedly useful in global
biogeography, we do not understand
the point they are trying to make. In
our article (2), which is cited in their
letter, we undertook a descriptive
study to determine whether spread of
HPAI (H5N1) virus was consistent in
time with ecologic drivers of bird mi-
gration and in space with distribution
of major migratory flyways of Ana-
tidae. It is obvious that the distribu-
tion pattern of Anatidae is dependent
on ecologic variables, and some of
these variables are summarized by the
ecoregion concept.
However, apart from a strictly
descriptive point of view, we do not
see how the ecoregion concept applies
to describe patterns in HPAI (H5N1)
spread and distribution. Sengupta et al.
list ecoregions where reports of HPAI
(H5N1) were concentrated. However,
what do they infer from this? They
observe regions with many reports of
HPAI (H5N1) and conclude that these
ecoregions are at risk. We find this
reasoning completely circular, and
any geographic zonation would pro-
vide the same observation. They may
mean that ecoregions define boundar-
ies within which secondary spread of
HPAI is more likely than across ecore-
gions. However, this hypothesis would
need to be more clearly demonstrated
and quantified before the ecoregion
concept can be used for global moni-
toring of HPAI (H5N1) outbreaks.
Marius Gilbert,*
Xiangming Xiao,†
and Jan Slingenbergh‡
*Free University of Brussels, Brussels,
Belgium; †University of New Hampshire,
Durham, New Hampshire, USA; and ‡Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations, Rome, Italy
References
1. Sengupta R, Rosenshein L, Gilbert M,
Weiller C. Ecoregional dominance in
spatial distribution of avian influenza
(H5N1) outbreaks. Emerg Infect Dis.
2007;13:1269–70.
2. Gilbert M, Xiao X, Domenech J, Lu-
broth J, Martin V, Slingenbergh J. Ana-
tidae migration in the western Palearctic
and spread of highly pathogenic avian
influenza H5N1 virus. Emerg Infect Dis.
2006;12:1650–6.
Address for correspondence: Marius Gilbert,
Laboratory of Biological Control and Spatial
Ecology, Free University of Brussels, CP
160/12, 50Ave F.D. Roosevelt, B-1050 Brussels,
Belgium; email: mgilbert@ulb.ac.be
Nephropathia
Epidemica in
Metropolitan Area,
Germany
To the Editor: Old World han-
taviruses (family Bunyaviridae) are
rodentborne pathogens that can cause
hemorrhagicfeverwithrenalsyndrome
(HFRS) (1). At least 3 different patho-
genic hantavirus species have been de-
tected in Europe: Dobrava-Belgrade
virus (DOBV), Tula virus, and Puum-
ala virus (PUUV) (1–3). Most human
hantavirus infections in Europe are as-
signed to PUUV transmitted by bank
voles (Myodes glareolus, formerly
Clethrionomys glareolus). Although
PUUV is thought to cause a mild form
of HFRS, designated as nephropathia
epidemica (NE), severe courses have
been described with a case-fatality ra-
tio of up to 0.6% (3).
Even though human hantavirus
infections have sporadically been re-
ported in Germany since 1983 (e.g.,
4–7), clinically apparent hantavirus
infections (HFRS, NE) did not be-
come notifiable diseases in Germany
until 2001. From 2001 through 2004,
≈140 to 240 cases per year have of-
ficially been documented in Germany;
most were caused by PUUV. Regions
endemic for PUUV have been identi-
fied in southern Germany, especially
the Alb-Danube region (4,6,8). Since
2004, 2 aspects of the situation in Ger-
many have changed. First, the number
of clinical cases has increased dramat-
ically to a total of 448 in 2005. Sec-
ond, hantavirus infections have been
observed in regions previously not
recognized as endemic for hantavi-
ruses (9). An increased number of hu-
man cases were also observed in other
European countries (10).
Here we report the first, to our
knowledge, documented PUUV-as-
sociated urban NE outbreak, which
occurred in a city park in Germany.
In 2005, a total of 89 cases were re-
ported in the district of Cologne with
LETTERS
1272 Emerging Infectious Diseases • www.cdc.gov/eid • Vol. 13, No. 8, August 2007
41 cases recorded in the city center
(incidence 4.2/100 000). In the past,
(2001–2004), 3–22 cases were report-
ed annually for the district of Cologne
and 2–6 cases for the city of Cologne.
Clinical symptoms, documented by re-
sponses to a questionnaire, resembled
those typical for NE found in previous
studies in Germany (4,5,7,8) and in-
cluded fever (93%), headache (43%),
and arthralgia (40%), without hemor-
rhage. Renal dysfunction was found in
≈83% of patients, and approximately
three-fourths of the patients were
temporarily hospitalized (n = 29). Se-
rologic investigations by ELISA and
indirect immunofluorescence assay
confirmed PUUV-reactive immuno-
globulin M (IgM) and IgG antibodies
in serum specimens from all 89 pa-
tients. The average age of the patients
was 39 years (range 6–65 years), and
the male/female ratio was 2.6:1.
For a large number of patients,
the exposure to PUUV most likely oc-
curred in a forested park and recreation
area (“Stadtwald,” 20 ha) in Cologne’s
inner city circle (Figure) where they
lived, worked, or enjoyed recreational
activities. Five patients had homes
adjacent to this area. Four patients
were evaluated for likely exposure
due to employment at the RheinEner-
gie Stadium, 1 player in the German
Football League and 3 employees who
had cleaned basements or attics at the
stadium (Figure). Three patients were
members of a tennis club located near
the stadium. To further investigate
these cases, in April and June 2005,
rodents were trapped in the Stadtwald.
The effort yielded 35 bank voles, 17
yellow-necked mice, and 1 wood
mouse. Screening of 48 available se-
rum specimens by ELISA with yeast-
expressed nucleocapsid (N) proteins
of PUUV and DOBV (9) demonstrated
19 reactive blood samples. Seventeen
had a higher endpoint titer to PUUV,
and 2 showed identical endpoint titers
for PUUV and DOBV. These 19 reac-
tive samples (63%) originated from 30
M. glareolus bank voles.
Lung tissues of all 53 mice were
analyzed by PUUV-specific reverse
transcription (RT)–PCRs targeting
the S segment (for primers, see [9]).
In 23 (66%) of the 35 bank voles, but
in none of the other rodents, PUUV-
specific RNA was amplified and se-
quenced. The concordance of ELI-
SA– and RT-PCR–positive samples
was 98% (online Appendix Table,
available from www.cdc.gov/EID/
content/13/8/1271-appT.htm).
Comparison of the partial S-seg-
ment nucleotide sequences obtained
showed intersequence distances of
0%–1.2%. The level of the nucleo-
tide sequence divergence from pre-
viously described German PUUV
strains was 14.7%–16%. In phylo-
genetic analyses (neighbor-joining,
maximum likelihood) based on this
fragment, all sequences from the Co-
logne cluster formed a distinct group
next to the branch consisting of strain
Erft (95.4%–96% identical). These
strains were clearly separated from
additional PUUV strains originating
from Germany (Berkel, southeastern
Germany, Heidelberg), and Belgium,
a neighboring European country (data
not shown).
The only hantavirus known in
an urban environment is Seoul virus,
which is transmitted mainly by the
peridomestic brown rat (Rattus nor-
vegicus). As with most other hantavi-
ruses, PUUV patients, including those
previously observed in Germany, were
reported to become infected in their
rural residences or, when living in ur-
ban regions, during visits to the coun-
tryside in their spare time (4).
To our knowledge, this is the first
reportdescribinganoutbreakofPUUV
infections in a metropolitan area in
Europe with a defined exposure site in
the city center. The PUUV outbreak in
1990 in the city of Ulm occurred due
to exposure during field military ma-
neuvers in the outskirts of the city near
the Danube River, and the surrounding
civilian population did not experience
a similar outbreak (6). The exposure
site of a previous cluster of PUUV-in-
fected patients reported from the city
of Ulm and its surroundings remain
uncertain but might be also rural be-
cause almost all patients lived outside
Figure. City of Cologne, showing its corridor of wooded public parks (shaded area) and
the location of the exposure sites in the Stadtwald stadium area: 1, Cologne cathedral; 2,
Stadtwald; 3, RheinEnergie Stadium; 4, university; 5, trade fair; 6, airport.
LETTERS
Emerging Infectious Diseases • www.cdc.gov/eid • Vol. 13, No. 8, August 2007 1273
the city of Ulm (8). In Cologne, about
two thirds of the bank voles captured
at the exposure site carried PUUV and
are assumed to be the most probable
source of infection. Increased sight-
ings of rodents were reported by local
health offices and pest control units.
Studies at putative exposure sites in
southeastern Germany in 2004 also
showed a high prevalence of PUUV in
the respective bank vole populations.
These cases are also the first in-
dication, to our knowledge, that rec-
reational activities in a forested city
park, infested by hantavirus-infected
rodents, may lead to human infections.
This possibility should be investigated
carefully in outbreak situations and
may have practical implications for
the future surveillance and prevention
of NE in Europe.
Acknowledgments
We thank C. Dettmer, L. Minke, A.
Lorber, S. Fink, and A. Thomas for excel-
lent technical assistance and P. Kranz, K.
Teske, and C. Staubach for help in prepar-
ing the manuscript. Rodent trapping was
supported by collaborators of the Depart-
ment Infection Hygiene of the City Health
Office of Cologne. Serologic data of the
patients were kindly provided by laborato-
ries in Aachen, Cologne, Heidelberg, and
Leverkusen.
The experiments were supported
by Contract-Research-Project for the
Bundeswehr Medical Service (M/SAB1/5/
A017).
Sandra S. Essbauer,*
Jonas Schmidt-Chanasit,†‡
Ernst L. Madeja,§
Wolfgang Wegener,§
Robert Friedrich,†
Rasa Petraityte,¶
Kestutis Sasnauskas,¶
Jens Jacob,# Judith Koch,**
Gerhard Dobler,*
Franz J. Conraths,†
Martin Pfeffer,*
Christian Pitra,††
and Rainer G. Ulrich†
*Bundeswehr Institute of Microbiology, Mu-
nich, Germany; †Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut,
Wusterhausen, Germany; ‡Frankfurt Uni-
versity Medical School, Frankfurt am Main,
Germany; §City Health Office of Cologne,
Cologne, Germany; ¶Institute of Biotech-
nology, Vilnius, Lithuania; #Federal Biologi-
cal Research Centre Institute for Agriculture
and Forestry, Münster, Germany; **Robert
Koch-Institut, Berlin, Germany; and ††Insti-
tute for Zoo Biology and Wildlife Research,
Berlin, Germany
References
1. Plyusnin A, Krüger DH, Lundkvist A.
Hantavirus infections in Europe. Adv Vi-
rus Res. 2001;57:105–36.
2. Klempa B, Meisel H, Räth S, Bartel J,
Ulrich R, Krüger DH. Occurrence of
renal and pulmonary syndrome in a re-
gion of North-East Germany where Tula
hantavirus circulates. J Clin Microbiol.
2003;41:4894–7.
3. Mustonen J, Vapalahti O, Henttonen H,
Pasternack A, Vaheri A. Epidemiology of
hantavirus infections in Europe. Nephrol
Dial Transplant. 1998;13:2729–31.
4. Pilaski J, Ellerich C, Kreutzer T, Lang A,
Benik W, Pohl-Koppe A, et al. Haemor-
rhagic fever with renal syndrome in Ger-
many. Lancet. 1991;337:111.
5. Pilaski J, Feldmann H, Morzunov S, Rol-
lin PE, Ruo SL, Lauer B, et al. Genetic
identification of a new Puumala virus
strain causing severe haemorrhagic fever
with renal syndrome in Germany. J Infect
Dis. 1994;170:1456–62.
6. Clement J, Underwood P, Ward D, Pilaski
J, LeDuc J. Hantavirus outbreak during
military manoeuvres in Germany. Lancet.
1996;347:336.
7. Heiske A, Anheier B, Pilaski J, Volchkov
VE, Feldmann H. A new Clethrionomys-
derived hantavirus from Germany: evi-
dence for the distinct genetic sublineages
of Puumala viruses in Western Europe.
Virus Res. 1999;61:101–12.
8. Rasche FM, Uhel B, Ulrich R, Krüger DH,
Karges W, Czock D, et al. Thrombocyto-
penia is a predictor for acute renal failure
in Puumala hantavirus infections. Emerg
Infect Dis. 2004;10:1420–5.
9. Essbauer S, Schmidt J, Conraths FJ, Fried-
rich R, Koch J, Hautmann W, et al. A new
Puumala hantavirus subtype in rodents as-
sociated with an outbreak of nephropathia
epidemica in South-East Germany in 2004.
Epidemiol Infect. 2006;134:1333–44.
10. Mailles A, Abu Sin M, Ducoffre G, Hey-
man P, Koch J, Zeller H. Larger than usual
increase in cases of hantavirus infections
in Belgium, France and Germany, June
2005. Eurosurveill. 2005;10: E050721.4.
Address for correspondence: Rainer G. Ulrich,
Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut, Federal Research
Institute for Animal Health, Institute for Novel
and Emerging Infectious Diseases, D-17493
Greifswald–Insel Riems, Germany; email:
rainer.ulrich@fli.bund.de
Effect of Hurricane
Katrina on
Arboviral Disease
Transmission
To the Editor: Rarely has the
aftermath of a natural disaster in the
continental United States resulted in
increased transmission of mosquito-
borne viruses (1). However, on August
29, 2005, Hurricane Katrina struck
Louisiana and Mississippi, where
mosquito-borne West Nile (WNV)
and St. Louis encephalitis viruses are
endemic.
Using data from the ArboNET
system of the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention, we evaluated
the short-term effects of Hurricane Ka-
trina on the reported incidence of hu-
man West Nile neuroinvasive disease
(WNND) and Saint Louis encephalitis
(SLE) in Louisiana and Mississippi us-
ing the reported week of onset and the
year (2003–2005). We also evaluated
incidence by onset date and county (or
parish) over 3 time intervals (January
1–August 31, September 1–Septem-
ber 30, and October 1–October 30) in
2005. Reporting lag was evaluated by
onset dates and corresponding dates of
reports. Because the completeness of
reporting of West Nile fever and other
arboviral fever cases is highly vari-
able, only reports of human WNND
and SLE were considered.
In Louisiana, the highest reported
incidence of WNND occurred in the
second week of August 2005, before
Hurricane Katrina made landfall. Al-
