© 2009 Bjerregaard et al, publisher and licensee Dove Medical Press Ltd.This is an Open Access article
which permits unrestricted noncommercial use, provided the original work is properly cited.
Clinical Epidemiology
Clinical Epidemiology 2009:1 119–124 119
Dovepress
open access to scientific and medical research
Open Access Full Text Article
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
o R i g i n al re s earc h
Detection of colorectal cancer in symptomatic
outpatients without visible rectal bleeding:   
Validity
of the fecal occult blood test
Niels Christian Bjerregaard1
Anders Tøttrup1
Henrik Toft Sørensen2
Søren Laurberg1
1
Department of Surgery P, Aarhus
Sygehus, Aarhus University Hospital,
Tage-Hansens Gade 2, 8000 Aarhus C,
Denmark; 2
Department of Clinical
Epidemiology, Aarhus University
Hospital, Olof Palmes Allé 43-45,
8200 Aarhus N, Denmark
Correspondence: Niels C Bjerregaard
Department of Surgery P, Aarhus Sygehus,
Aarhus University Hospital, Tage-Hansens
Gade 2, DK-8000 Aarhus C, Denmark
Tel +45 89 49 75 75
Fax +45 89 49 77 18
Email ncb.mk@mail.tele.dk
Background: In 2002, a new diagnostic strategy in symptomatic outpatients without known
established colorectal cancer risk factors aged 40 years or older was implemented in Denmark.
Fecal occult blood test (Hemoccult Sensa®
) was a part of that strategy in patients without visible
rectal bleeding.
Aims: The aim was to assess the validity of the Hemoccult Sensa®
test in detecting colorectal
cancer in the above-mentioned outpatients.
Patients: Symptomatic outpatients without known established colorectal cancer risk factors
and without visible rectal bleeding.
Methods: Hemoccult Sensa®
was performed before endoscopic examination. Colorectal cancer
was identified at histopathological examination. Patients completed a questionnaire about their
symptoms before their first hospital appointment.
Results: Eight of 256 patients were found to have colorectal cancer. Median patient age was
63 years. The positive predictive value, negative predictive value, sensitivity, and specificity of
Hemoccult Sensa®
for colorectal cancer were 10.5% (95% confidence interval [CI]: 6.8–14.3),
99.0% (95% CI: 97.8–100.0), 75.0% (95% CI: 69.7–80.3), and 79.4% (95% CI: 74.5–84.4).
Conclusions: Hemoccult Sensa®
as the initial examination in symptomatic outpatients without
known established colorectal cancer risk factors presenting without rectal bleeding has to be
used with caution. We did not find Hemoccult Sensa®
test to be an acceptable alternative to
flexible sigmoidoscopy.
Keywords: colorectal neoplasms, occult blood, diagnostic tests, sensitivity, specificity
Introduction
Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the most common cancers in Westernized
countries1,2
and the number of cases is expected to rise as the population ages.3
The vast majority of CRCs are found in patients without established CRC risk
factors4
who are diagnosed upon onset of symptoms or through routine screening.
In Denmark, screening for CRC is not offered to the general public. In 2002, a new
diagnostic strategy in symptomatic outpatients without known established CRC risk
factors aged 40 or older and referred by general practitioners was implemented in
Denmark. A fecal occult blood test (FOBT, Hemoccult Sensa®
; Beckman Coulter
Gmbh, Krefeld, Germany) was a part of the strategy in patients without visible rectal
bleeding. Symptoms indicative of CRC – changes in bowel habits, abdominal pain.
and unintentional loss of weight – are also prevalent both in the general population
and in patients with benign disease,5–9
differentiation between patients with CRC and
those with benign disease is difficult. Using patient history alone as an indication
Number of times this article has been viewed
This article was published in the following Dove Press journal:
Clinical Epidemiology
18 September 2009
Clinical Epidemiology 2009:1
120
Bjerregaard et al Dovepress
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
of CRC may lead many patients with benign conditions to
undergo endoscopic examinations. Hemoccult Sensa®
could
be used as the initial diagnostic procedure for symptomatic
outpatients without visible rectal bleeding.10
Earlier studies of the usefulness of FOBT in detecting
CRC among symptomatic patients reported sensitivities
ranging from 69% to 100%, specificities ranging from 73%
to 89%, and positive predictive values ranging from 7% to
76%.10–14
These studies either evaluated the Hemoccult and
Hemoccult II tests, which are less sensitive to fecal blood
than Hemoccult Sensa®
, and/or did not take into consideration
reason for colonoscopy referral (eg, symptoms or routine
surveillance), risk profile (patients with vs patients without
established CRC risk factors), or presence of visible rectal
bleeding. We aimed to access the validity of Hemoccult
Sensa®
in symptomatic outpatients without known estab-
lished CRC risk factors aged 40 years or older presenting
without visible rectal bleeding, and who were referred by
general practitioners, by estimating the sensitivity, specificity,
and predictive values of Hemoccult Sensa®
for CRC.
Patients and methods
This observational study took place in the surgical outpatient
clinics at two public Danish hospitals in Aarhus County,
Denmark (Randers Central Hospital [RCH] and Aarhus
University Hospital [AUH]). These clinics are the primary
referral centers in the two hospitals’ catchment areas for
patients with symptoms consistent with CRC.
As of January 1st, 2003, about 91% of the 433,000
residents in the two hospitals’ catchment areas were of
Danish origin. The entire population of Denmark receives
tax-supported health care from the National Health
Service, which allows free access to primary care (general
practitioners) and to public hospitals. The study period was
September 1st, 2002 to December 31st, 2003 in RCH and
October 1st, 2002 to December 31st, 2003 in AUH.
The study was approved by the local Scientific Ethics
Committee and Danish Data Protection Agency.
Identification of study participants
At AUH, an author (NCB) reviewed all referrals to the
surgical outpatient clinic. At RCH, a consultant reviewed
the referrals. At the conclusion of enrolment, NCB examined
case notes at RCH to ensure strict adherence to inclusion and
exclusion criteria. Patients without known established CRC
risk factors aged 40 years or older referred by the general
practitioners, with symptoms consistent with CRC, were
included in the study. Patients younger than 40 years and
those with known established CRC risk factors (history of
CRC or colorectal adenoma, inflammatory bowel disease,
endometrial cancer, at least one first-degree relative under
the age of 50 years with CRC or colorectal adenoma, familial
hereditary nonpolyposis CRC, or familial adenomatous
polyposis) were excluded. Eligible patients received a mailed
questionnaire covering symptoms as well as CRC history
among first-degree relatives. Completed questionnaires
were collected during initial appointments at AUH or RCH.
The examining endoscopist (surgeon or nurse) recorded the
type of procedure performed (eg, flexible sigmoidoscopy
[FS], colonoscopy, or FOBT) along with its findings on an
examination form.
Data from the questionnaire and the examination form
were entered into a database. Patients who reported CRC
in first-degree relatives younger than 50 years of age were
excluded.
From the database, we retrieved patients with available
Hemoccult Sensa®
test results who answered “no” or “don’t
know” to the questionnaire item about rectal bleeding in the
past 12 months. The date of the Hemoccult Sensa®
test and its
results were obtained from the departments of biochemistry at
AUHandRCH.Thesetwodepartmentsanalyzedboththetests
done by the general practitioners and the surgical outpatient
clinics. Only patients with a Hemoccult Sensa®
test performed
within two months preceding referral, or with a Hemoccult
Sensa®
test performed as the initial investigation at the
surgical outpatient clinics were included in the analyses.
Fecal occult blood test
The Hemoccult Sensa®
test was distributed to patients either
bytheirgeneralpractitionersbeforereferral,orbyhospitalstaff
duringthefirstvisittothesurgicaloutpatientclinic.Todecrease
false-positive and false-negative rates, patients were asked
to abstain from red meat, cauliflower, tomato, paprika,
horseradish, banana, melon, and soya beans (peroxidase-rich
vegetables), and to avoid large amounts of other fresh fruit and
rawvegetablesthreedaysbeforecollectionofthefirstspecimen
and throughout the collection period. Except when treatment
interruption entailed health risks, patients were also instructed
to abstain from acetylsalicylic acid, other nonsteroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs, adrenocortical hormones, and
supplements containing iron and vitamin C. Stool specimens
collected from three separate bowel movements were smeared
on the Hemoccult Sensa®
card windows and processed
within six days of the final specimen collection.
To standardize results and facilitate data collection,
Hemoccult Sensa®
test cards from the study patients were
Clinical Epidemiology 2009:1 121
Fecal occult blood test in symptomatic outpatients
Dovepress
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
processed only by the participating hospitals’ Biochemistry
Departments.15
Identification of patients with cancer
Endoscopic examinations
If the Hemoccult Sensa®
test was negative, a FS was
recommended; additional examinations were performed if
indicated by symptoms and findings at FS. Patients whose
FS revealed polyps were referred for colonoscopy. When the
Hemoccult Sensa®
test result was positive, a colonoscopy was
recommended. If a colonoscopy was incomplete a double-
contrast barium enema (DBCE) or a virtual colonoscopy
(VC) was performed.
All FS’s were performed either by experienced nurse-
endoscopists, surgeon-endoscopists (junior doctors and
experienced surgeons). Colonoscopies were performed
by experienced surgeon-endoscopists or by junior doctors
supervised by an experienced surgeon-endoscopist.
All biopsied or excised tumors were submitted for histo-
pathological examination.
Follow up to identify missed cancers
Cases of CRC diagnosed after discharge from the surgical
outpatient clinics and before January 1st, 2005 were consid-
ered to have been missed during the diagnostic examinations.
To detect such missed cancers, we searched computerized
records from the hospital discharge registries of Aarhus
County and two adjoining counties, Viborg and North Jutland
Counties January 1st, 2005. These registries were previ-
ously found to have high validity.16
These population-based
administrative public registries contain data on all nonpsy-
chiatric hospital admissions since 1977, as well as data on
outpatient and emergency visits since 1994. The registries
include the unique personal identification numbers issued to
all citizens of Denmark, as well as primary and secondary
diagnoses coded by medical doctors at discharge according
to the International Classification of Diseases (ICD). We used
the following ICD, 10th revision (ICD-10) codes to identify
patients with CRC at follow-up: DC18.0, DC18.2–18.9,
DC19.9, and DC20.9.
Patients were classified as having CRC if endoscopy
detected a malignancy (confirmed by histopathological
examination) or if CRC were detected during the follow-up
period (confirmed by histopathological examination).
Statistical analysis
We estimated the sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive
value (PPV), and negative predictive value (NPV) of
Hemoccult Sensa®
for CRC. Sensitivity was defined as
the proportion of people with CRC who had a positive
result on Hemoccult Sensa®
; specificity was defined as
the proportion of people without CRC who had a negative
Hemoccult Sensa®
; PPV was defined as the probability of
CRC in a patient with a positive Hemoccult Sensa®
; and
NPV was defined as the probability of not having CRC given
a negative Hemoccult Sensa®
test.17
The statistical analysis
was performed with STATA 8.0 software (Stata Corporation,
College Station, TX, USA).
Results
Two thousand four hundred eight outpatients without
known established CRC risk factors aged 40 years or older
with symptoms consistent with CRC were examined in
the two surgical outpatient clinics during the study period.
Twenty-six were excluded due to a questionnaire reporting
of CRC in a first-degree relative aged younger than 50 years.
Two hundred fifty-six patients who met the inclusion criteria
for the present study (no self-reported rectal bleeding in the
past 12 months, Hemoccult Sensa®
test as the initial investi-
gation) were retrieved from the database. The median age of
study patients was 63 years (range 40–94 years) with 62.5%
of the patients aged 60 years or older. One hundred and eight
(42.2%) were men. The symptoms and signs reported by
the patients are listed in Table 1 and the primary discharge
diagnoses are listed in Table 2.
In 11 patients, the colonoscopy was incomplete, and
the patients subsequently received either a DCBE or a VC.
One patient had FS and DBCE/VC, and 120 had only FS.
Fifty-seven of the 256 patients had a positive Hemoccult
Sensa®
test, and of these 56 underwent colonoscopy;
the 57th patient had a cancer diagnosed at a FS. Of the
Table 1 Symptoms and signs reported by referred outpatients undergoing
a Hemoccult Sensa®
test as their initial examination
Symptom/sign %
Fatigue 42.9
Weight loss 21.0
Anemia 12.0
Mucus discharge 23.7
Change in frequency of bowel movements 61.3
Change in consistency of stool 72.4
Insufficient rectal emptying 50.4
Abdominal pain 62.5
Colorectal cancer in first-degree relatives
older than 50 years of age
8.0
Clinical Epidemiology 2009:1
122
Bjerregaard et al Dovepress
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
199 patients with a negative Hemoccult Sensa®
test, 119 had
only FS, 79 had a colonoscopy, and one patient had FS and
DBCE/VC. In total, 135 of the 256 eligible patients (52.7%)
underwent colonoscopy.
Eight cancers were diagnosed in the 256 patients (3.1%;
95% confidence interval [CI]: 1.4%–6.1%). The tumor stages
(according to Dukes), sites, and Hemoccult Sensa®
test
results are listed in Table 3. Of the six patients with cancer
and positive Hemoccult Sensa®
test, one had only FS and five
underwent colonoscopy. One patient with cancer and negative
Hemoccult Sensa®
test underwent colonoscopy when found
to have iron deficiency anemia. The other patient with CRC
and a negative Hemoccult Sensa®
test was diagnosed at a
DCBE following an inadequate FS.
No missed cancers were found at follow-up using the
hospital discharge registries. Mean follow-up time was
18.1 months (range 0.1–28.0 months).
Six of the 57 patients with a positive Hemoccult Sensa®
test were diagnosed with CRC (Table 2). Of the 199 patients
with a negative Hemoccult Sensa®
test, two were diagnosed
with CRC. One patient with cancer also had a large adenoma
(10 mm or larger). Of the 248 patients without cancer, 51 had
a positive Hemoccult Sensa®
test; ten of these were diagnosed
with an adenoma, including six patients with adenomas
10 mm or larger. Of the 80 patients with a negative Hemoccult
Sensa®
test and complete visualization of their colons, 30 had
an adenoma of any size (six of these were 10 mm or larger).
The PPV and NPV of Hemoccult Sensa®
for CRC were
10.5% (95% CI: 6.8–14.3) and 99.0% (95% CI: 97.8–100.0).
Sensitivity and specificity of Hemoccult Sensa®
for
CRC were 75.0% (95% CI: 69.7–80.3) and 79.4% (95%
CI: 74.5–84.4).
In addition to the 256 study patients without visible rectal
bleeding who were included in the present Hemoccult Sensa®
validation study, 735 additional patients without visible rectal
bleeding were examined who had no Hemoccult Sensa®
,
whose test was done after an endoscopic examination,
or whose test took place more than two months before
referral for endoscopic examination. Of these 735 patients,
28 (3.8%; 95% CI: 2.5–5.5) were diagnosed with CRC
during the study period and follow-up period.
Discussion
To the best of our knowledge, this study is the first to assess
the diagnostic validity of Hemoccult Sensa®
for CRC in
symptomatic outpatients without known established CRC risk
factors presenting without visible rectal bleeding. We found
Hemoccult Sensa®
to perform only relatively acceptable
in distinguishing between patients with and without CRC,
and for the time being we do not find it to be an acceptable
alternative to FS as the initial examination.
One of the most important strengths of our study, is
that its participants were representative of the patient
population targeted for use of Hemoccult Sensa®
in
Denmark. By excluding patients with known established
CRC risk factors, the risk profile among study subjects
was homogeneous. This is particularly important since
the predictive value of a test depends on the prevalence of
the disease in the population, and the prevalence of CRC
is expected to be less in a population without established
Table 2 Primary diagnoses at discharge of the 256 study patients
by Hemoccult Sensa®
result
Primary diagnosis Positive
(number)
Negative
(number)
Colorectal cancer 6 2
Adenoma 10 mm 6 6
Adenoma 10 mm 4 26
Nonneoplastic polyps 6 24
Normal colon and rectum 22 98
Diverticular disease 7 33
Diverticulitis sequelae 1 2
Colitis
Crohn’s disease 0 1
Ulcerative colitis 0 0
Others 3 5
Angiodysplasia 2 1
Lymphoma 0 1
Total 57 199
Table 3 Tumor site and stage and Hemoccult Sensa®
test results
for the eight patients with colorectal cancer
Tumor site Tumor stage Hemoccult
Sensa®
Rectum Dukes’ stage B Positive
Rectum Dukes’ stage B Positive
Sigmoid colon Dukes’ stage B Positive
Sigmoid colon Adenocarcinoma in
an adenoma (T1)a
Positive
Ascending colon Dukes’ stage D Negative
Coecum Dukes’ stage B Positive
Coecum Dukes’ stage B Positive
Coecum and right
flexure
Dukes’ stage unknown.
The patient had peritoneal
dissemination
Negative
Note: a
TNM classification.
Clinical Epidemiology 2009:1 123
Fecal occult blood test in symptomatic outpatients
Dovepress
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
CRC risk factors than in a population with established CRC
risk factors.17
Also, the study focused on patients who did not report
rectal bleeding. The probability of CRC in patients with
visible rectal bleeding is higher than in patients without
visible rectal bleeding, and visible rectal bleeding increases
the likelihood of a positive FOBT.18
Analysis of a pooled
sample of patients both with and without visible rectal
bleeding may not have provided useful information about
the test’s value in each subgroup.
Several potential study weaknesses must be noted.
We attempted to control for differential recall by selecting
patients on the basis of symptoms experienced and reported in
the questionnaire before the first visit to the surgical outpatient
clinics. We cannot exclude some selection bias, because a part
of the 735 additional patients without visible rectal bleeding
might have been referred directly to colonoscopy due to the
severity or duration of the symptom. However, the prevalence
of CRC among these additional patients was only slightly
different from the prevalence in the study population.
We included patients regardless of whether they had
undergone a FOBT on the recommendation of their general
practitioner. It is possible that patients with a negative
Hemoccult Sensa®
test performed in the general practice
setting may have been less likely to receive a referral to a
surgical outpatient clinic, while patients with severe symp-
toms were more likely to be referred. If all patients who had
a Hemoccult Sensa®
test at the recommendation of their
general practitioners were uniformly referred to the hospital
clinics, the proportion of study participants with a negative
Hemoccult Sensa®
may have been higher.
For a number of reasons, our calculation of the sensitivity
of Hemoccult Sensa®
for CRC is likely to be overestimated.
First, because of the selective approach used in the standard
diagnostic regimen, colonoscopy was performed in only
about half of study patients. If all patients had undergone
colonoscopy, we may have diagnosed more cases of proximal
CRC. Second, a cancer missed by Hemoccult Sensa®
might
not have been detected within our study’s follow-up period.19
Finally, CRC and adenomas are more likely to bleed than
normal colon mucosa; interruption of anticoagulant therapy
during stool collection was considered too risky, and this
may have increased the rate of positive tests in especially
study patients with neoplasm.
To reduce the false-positive rate from ingested peroxidase,
it is recommended that dietary and medication restrictions be
imposed three days prior to starting the Hemoccult Sensa®
test.20
As we were unable to monitor patient adherence to
these restrictions, low compliance may have contributed
to the relatively low specificity and PPV for CRC.
Adenomas smaller than 10 mm were more prevalent
in patients with a negative Hemoccult Sensa®
test than in
patients with a positive test (13.1% vs 7.0%), suggesting
that such adenomas may be found by chance, as indicated
in another study.21
An earlier study found that FOBT has a low sensitivity
for detecting rectal cancer.11
We were not able to confirm
or disprove this finding, owing to our study’s limited
sample size; however, all patients with rectal cancers had
a positive Hemoccult Sensa®
. This concordance may arise
because Hemoccult Sensa®
is a more sensitive test than
Hemoccult and Hemoccult II.22,23
Our estimated values of sensitivity, specificity, and PPV
are consistent with those reported previously for different
patient populations.13,14,24
A study which examined Hemoccult
Sensa®
in a patient sample with the same CRC prevalence as
in our study also found the same value for sensitivity. Unlike
ours, that study included patients with one or fewer weekly
episodes of visible bright red blood per rectum, thereby
increasing the likelihood of a positive Hemoccult Sensa®
.14
Our PPV for CRC was similar to that reported for
patients undergoing routine screening.24
While this finding
was unexpected, it may be explained by the fact that the vast
majority of patients in the screening population were men,
who are at increased risk of advanced polyps and cancers.25
Our estimates of sensitivity, specificity, and PPV were very
similar to that found in one study which evaluated the less
sensitive test Hemoccult II in referred symptomatic patients.
Unlike ours, that study included patients with established
CRC risk factors and patients with rectal bleeding.13
In conclusion, we found Hemoccult Sensa®
only to have
relatively acceptable sensitivity and specificity for CRC in
symptomatic outpatients without known established CRC
risk factors presenting without visible rectal bleeding.
Moreover, a considerable number of patients with a positive
test had no significant colorectal pathology. Thus, we do not
find that Hemoccult Sensa®
is an acceptable alternative to FS
as the initial examination in symptomatic patients without
known established CRC risk factors presenting without rectal
bleeding, especially because FS is a safe examination, has a
relatively high sensitivity for CRC and can be performed in
outpatients without sedation and analgesia.
Acknowledgments
We thank the staff of the surgery outpatient clinics at Aarhus
University Hospital and Randers Central Hospital, Denmark
Clinical Epidemiology 2009:1
Clinical Epidemiology
Publish your work in this journal
Submit your manuscript here: http://www.dovepress.com/clinical-epidemiology-journal
Clinical Epidemiology is an international, peer-reviewed, open access
journal focusing on disease and drug epidemiology, identification of
risk factors and screening procedures to develop optimal preventative
initiatives and programs. Specific topics include: diagnosis, prognosis,
treatment, screening, prevention, risk factor modification, systematic
reviews, risk & safety of medical interventions, epidemiology &
biostatical methods, evaluation of guidelines, translational medicine,
health policies & economic evaluations. The manuscript management
system is completely online and includes a very quick and fair peer-
review system, which is all easy to use.
124
Bjerregaard et al Dovepress
submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
Dovepress
Dovepress
for participating in the study. Financial support for this study
was provided by the Danish Cancer Society; AP Møller og
Hustru Chastine Mc-Kinney Møllers Fond til almene Formaal;
Erland Richard Frederiksen og Hustrus Legat; Meta og Håkon
Baggers Fond, Max og Inger Wørzners Mindelegat; Aarhus
Universitets Forskningsfond and Institute of Experimental
Clinical Research, Aarhus University. All authors declare
they have no personal financial or non-financial conflicts
of interest.
References
1. Wilmink AB. Overview of the epidemiology of colorectal cancer.
Dis Colon Rectum. 1997;40(4):483–493.
2. Parkin DM, Pisani P, Ferlay J. Estimates of the worldwide incidence of
eighteen major cancers in 1985. Int J Cancer. 1993;54(4):594–606.
3. Møller B, Fekjaer H, Hakulinen T, et al. Prediction of cancer incidence
in the Nordic countries up to the year 2020. Eur J Cancer Prev.
2002;11 Suppl 1:S1–S96.
4. Rudy DR, Zdon MJ. Update on colorectal cancer. Am Fam Physician.
2000;61(6):1759–1764.
5. Dent OF, Goulston KJ, Zubrzycki J, Chapuis PH. Bowel symptoms in an
apparently well population. Dis Colon Rectum. 1986;29(4):243–247.
6. Kay L, Jørgensen T, Schultz-Larsen K. Colon related symptoms in
a 70-year-old Danish population. J Clin Epidemiol 1993;46(12):
1445–1449.
7. Talley NJ, O’Keefe EA, Zinsmeister AR, Melton LJ. Prevalence of
gastrointestinal symptoms in the elderly: A population-based study.
Gastroenterology. 1992;102(3):895–901.
8. Crosland A, Jones R. Rectal bleeding: Prevalence and consultation
behaviour. BMJ. 1995;311(7003):486–488.
9. Everhart JE, Go VL, Johannes RS, Fitzsimmons SC, Roth HP,
White LR. A longitudinal survey of self-reported bowel habits in the
United States. Dig Dis Sci. 1989;34(8):1153–1162.
10. Farrands PA, O’Regan D, Taylor I. An assessment of occult blood
testing to determine which patients with large bowel symptoms
require urgent investigation. Br J Surg. 1985;72(10):835–837.
11. Leicester RJ, Lightfoot A, Millar J, Colin-Jones DG, Hunt RH. Accuracy
and value of the Hemoccult test in symptomatic patients. Br Med J
(Clin Res Ed). 1983;286(6366):673–674.
12. Tate JJ, Northway J, Royle GT, Taylor I. Faecal occult blood testing
in symptomatic patients: Comparison of three tests. Br J Surg. 1990;
77(5):523–526.
13. Niv Y, Sperber AD. Sensitivity, specificity, and predictive value of
fecal occult blood testing (Hemoccult II) for colorectal neoplasia in
symptomatic patients: a prospective study with total colonoscopy.
Am J Gastroenterol. 1995;90(11):1974–1977.
14. Greenberg PD, Bertario L, Gnauck R, et al. A prospective multicenter
evaluation of new fecal occult blood tests in patients undergoing
colonoscopy. Am J Gastroenterol. 2000;95(5):1331–1338.
15. Sinatra MA, Young GP, St. John DJ, Blake D, Ratnaike S. A study of
laboratory based faecal occult blood testing in Melbourne, Australia.
The Faecal Occult Blood Testing Study Group. J Gastroenterol
Hepatol. 1998;13(4):396–400.
16. Andersen TF, Madsen M, Jorgensen J, Mellemkjoer L, Olsen JH. The
Danish National Hospital Register. A valuable source of data for modern
health sciences. Dan Med Bull. 1999;46(3):263–268.
17. Fletcher RH, Fletcher SW, Wagner EH. Clinical epidemiology: the
essentials. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 1996.
18. Nakama H, Kayano T, Katsuura T, et al. Comparison of predictive
value for colorectal cancer in subjects with and without rectal bleeding.
Hepatogastroenterology. 1999;46(27):1730–1732.
19. Allison JE, Feldman R, Tekawa IS. Hemoccult screening in detecting
colorectal neoplasm: sensitivity, specificity, and predictive value.
Long-term follow-up in a large group practice setting. Ann Intern Med.
1990;112(5):328–333.
20. Rozen P, Knaani J, Samuel Z. Eliminating the need for dietary
restrictions when using a sensitive guaiac fecal occult blood test.
Dig Dis Sci. 1999;44(4):756–760.
21. Ransohoff DF, Lang CA. Small adenomas detected during fecal occult
blood test screening for colorectal cancer. The impact of serendipity.
JAMA. 1990;264(1):76–78.
22. St. John DJ, Young GP, Alexeyeff MA, Deacon MC, Cuthbertson AM,
Macrae FA, et al. Evaluation of new occult blood tests for detection of
colorectal neoplasia. Gastroenterology. 1993;104(6):1661–1668.
23. Petty MT, Deacon MC, Alexeyeff MA, St. John DJ, Young GP. Read-
ability and sensitivity of a new faecal occult blood test in a hospital
ward environment. Comparison with an established test. Med J Aust.
1992;156(6):420–423.
24. Ko CW, Dominitz JA, Nguyen TD. Fecal occult blood testing in
a general medical clinic: comparison between guaiac-based and
immunochemical-based tests. Am J Med. 2003;115(2):111–114.
25. ImperialeTF,WagnerDR,LinCY,LarkinGN,RoggeJD,Ransohoff DF.
Risk of advanced proximal neoplasms in asymptomatic adults accord-
ing to the distal colorectal findings. N Engl J Med. 2000;343(3):
169–174.
