VALIDATION STUDY

Validation of Cancer Cases Using Primary Care, Cancer
Registry, and Hospitalization Data in the United Kingdom
Andrea V. Margulis,a Joan Fortuny,a James A. Kaye,b Brian Calingaert,c Maria Reynolds,c Estel Plana,a
Lisa J. McQuay,c Willem Jan Atsma,d Billy Franks,d Stefan de Vogel,d
Susana Perez-Gutthann,a and Alejandro Arana a
Background: In the United Kingdom, hospital or cancer registry
data can be linked to electronic medical records for a subset of general practices and years.
Methods: We used Clinical Practice Research Datalink data (2004–
2012) from patients treated for overactive bladder. We electronically
identified provisional cases of 10 common cancers in General Practitioner Online Database data and validated them by medical profile
review. In practices with linkage to Hospital Episodes Statistics and
National Cancer Data Repository (2004–2010), we validated provisional cancer cases against these data sources. This linkage also let
us identify additional cancer diagnoses in individuals without cancer
diagnosis records in the General Practitioner Online Database.
Results: Among 50,840 patients, 1,486 provisional cancer cases were
identified in the General Practitioner Online Database for 2004–2012.
Medical profile review confirmed 93% of 661 cases in nonlinked practices (range, 100% of non-Hodgkin lymphomas and uterine cancer to
77% of skin melanomas) and 96% of 825 cases in linked practices
(100% of kidney and uterine cancers to 92% of melanomas). In the
Submitted February 27, 2017; accepted November 7, 2017.
From the aRTI Health Solutions, Barcelona, Spain; bRTI Health Solutions,
Waltham, MA; cRTI Health Solutions, Research Triangle Park, NC; and
d
Astellas Pharma B.V., Leiden, The Netherlands.
Supported by Astellas Pharma Global Development, Inc.
The contract provides the research team independent publication rights. Andrea
Margulis, Joan Fortuny, James Kaye, Brian Calingaert, Maria Reynolds,
Estel Plana, Lisa McQuay, Susana Perez-Gutthann, and Alejandro Arana are
employees of RTI International, an independent, nonprofit research organization that does work for government agencies and pharmaceutical companies. Willem Jan Atsma, Billy Franks, and Stefan de Vogel are employees of
Astellas Pharma Global Development, the sponsors of this study.
The results of the study were generated by RTI Health Solutions (RTI-HS)
using data obtained from Clinical Practice Research Datalink (CPRD).
RTI-HS developed proprietary code to perform the analyses on the data.
Researchers desiring access to the data would be required to obtain permission from the study sponsor, obtain data use agreement with CPRD,
and develop their own code.
Supplemental digital content is available through direct URL citations
in the HTML and PDF version of this article (www.epidem.com).
Correspondence: Andrea V. Margulis, RTI Health Solutions, Av. Diagonal,
605, 9-1, 08028 Barcelona, Spain. E-mail: amargulis@rti.org.
Copyright © 2017 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. This
is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution-Non Commercial-No Derivatives License 4.0 (CCBY-NC-ND),
where it is permissible to download and share the work provided it is properly
cited. The work cannot be changed in any way or used commercially without
permission from the journal.
ISSN: 1044-3983/18/2902-0308
DOI: 10.1097/EDE.0000000000000786

308 | www.epidem.com

subset of linked practices, for 2004–2010, 720 cases were confirmed,
of which 68% were identifiable in the General Practitioner Online
Database (range, 90% of breast to 36% of kidney cancers).
Conclusions: Most cases of cancer identified electronically in the General Practitioner Online Database were confirmed. A substantial proportion of cases, especially of cancer types not typically managed by general
practitioners, would be missed without Hospital Episodes Statistics and
National Cancer Data Repository data (and are likely missed in nonlinked
practices). See video abstract at, http://links.lww.com/EDE/B315.
Registration (before study conduct): European Union electronic Register of Post-Authorisation Studies (EU PAS Registry) number EUPAS5529,
http://www.encepp.eu/encepp/viewResource.htm?id=11107.
(Epidemiology 2018;29: 308–313)

E

lectronic medical records generated during routine primary care in the United Kingdom are often used for health
care research. The capture of cancer cases in primary care
electronic medical records, such as the General Practitioner
Online Database, the primary care part of the Clinical Practice
Research Datalink (known as CPRD), has been shown to be
incomplete and to vary by cancer type.1–3
To increase validity and completeness, use of additional
data sources may be warranted, such as hospital records (Hospital Episodes Statistics) or cancer registry data (National
Cancer Data Repository), but these data sources are available only for a subset of patients in the CPRD and are not
available for the most recent patient follow-up due to data lag
(about 1 year for Hospital Episode Statistics and 2 years for
the National Cancer Data Repository).
As a part of an international postapproval cancer safety
program evaluating a new drug to treat overactive bladder, we
validated cancer endpoints in the General Practitioner Online
Database and linked data to Hospital Episode Statistics and
the National Cancer Data Repository.4 The results from this
validation effort are presented here.

METHODS
Data Sources
The CPRD, covering about 7% of the U.K. population, contains electronic medical records created by general
Epidemiology • Volume 29, Number 2, March 2018

Epidemiology • Volume 29, Number 2, March 2018

practitioners during their clinical practice. General practitioners provide referrals to specialists, receive results from specialists and hospital discharge notes, and prescribe treatment
for acute and chronic conditions.5 The General Practitioner
Online Database includes issued prescriptions and Read codes
for diagnoses, signs, symptoms, referrals, test requests, and
test results, as well as free-text comments, which are unstructured fields for information supplementing coded entries.
Information is recorded to the extent that it is important for
health care. About 75% of English practices contributing to
the CPRD have consented to have their patients’ information
linked to other health care data sets, like Hospital Episode Statistics or the National Cancer Data Repository.5 In Hospital
Episode Statistics and the National Cancer Data Repository,
diagnoses are recorded using the International Statistical
Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems, 10th
Revision. All data for this study were deidentified.
In the parent cancer safety study, patients with a prescription for darifenacin, fesoterodine, oxybutynin, solifenacin,
tolterodine, or trospium were included if they had at least 12
months of continuous enrollment before the prescription in an
“up-to-standard” practice (a practice considered by the CPRD to
deliver data of adequate quality for research), provided that the
same agent was not prescribed during the previous 12 months
and that the patient was 18 years or older at the time of the prescription. We excluded patients with previous cancer (except
nonmelanoma skin cancer) because the focus of this study was
first incident cancers. Patients with HIV infection were excluded
because these patients may have received health care through
specialty clinics or separate health plans, and their health service
utilization might not be captured fully in the CPRD.

Validation Cohort
For the validation study, we selected from the population included in the safety study a stratified random sample,
retaining all patients with a qualifying prescription for the
three least commonly prescribed drugs (darifenacin, fesoterodine, and trospium) and 33% of patients with a qualifying
prescription for the most common drugs (oxybutynin, solifenacin, and tolterodine). This was done to ensure that all study
drugs would be well represented in the validation cohort.
The study period was January 1, 2004, to December
31, 2012. Because the end of data collection in the General
Practitioner Online Database was later than in Hospital Episode Statistics and the National Cancer Data Repository,
linked person-time in patients enrolled in practices with linkage to Hospital Episode Statistics and the National Cancer
Data Repository was followed by nonlinked person-time. The
period of complete overlap between data sources was January
1, 2004, to December 31, 2010 (Figure 1). Follow-up started
with the qualifying prescription and ended at the earliest of
end of the study period, disenrollment, HIV infection or cancer (except non–melanoma skin cancer), or death. We conducted validation efforts on the validation cohort.
© 2017 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

Validation of Common Cancers in UK Primary Care Data

The cancer endpoints were 10 common cancers: bladder, female breast, colorectal, corpus uteri, kidney and renal
pelvis, lung and bronchus, non-Hodgkin lymphoma, pancreas,
prostate, and skin melanoma.

Case Identification and Validation
Validation processes available for each patient depended
on whether the individual’s data in the General Practitioner
Online Database were linked to Hospital Episode Statistics
and the National Cancer Data Repository.

Validation in the General Practitioner Online Database (Nonlinked and Linked) Practices
Provisional cancer cases were identified using an electronic algorithm that searched for Read diagnosis codes in the
General Practitioner Online Database, for practices without or
with linkage to Hospital Episode Statistics and the National
Cancer Data Repository. As morphology and treatment codes
are often not specific to cancer type, we did not include these
types of codes in the electronic algorithm; we used them for
case confirmation. Codes for benign neoplasms and in situ
cancers were not included in the electronic algorithm.
We created electronic medical profiles with patients’
diagnoses, procedures, relevant additional clinical information, and prescriptions. Medical profiles for these patients were
reviewed by a team of clinical reviewers blinded to the study
drugs, including a specialist in medical oncology/hematology,
with free-text comments around the event date (n = 405; freetext comments were requested when the diagnosis was not clear
from the cancer-related codes) or without free-text comments
(n = 1,081). Provisional cases identified by the electronic algorithm were confirmed when patient medical profiles presented
supportive clinical evidence of a cancer diagnosis, including
morphology and treatment codes, codes indicating the general
practitioner reviewed the patient’s cancer care, or supportive
free-text comments. Details on the content of patient profiles,
criteria to request free-text comments, reviewers’ training, and
review process are presented in the supplemental information.
If definitive information was found indicating that a provisional case did not have a cancer diagnosis, the patient was
considered a noncase. When the medical profile had evidence
that a provisional case had cancer diagnosed before cohort
entry, the patient was considered a noncase and excluded from
the study. Provisional cases not confirmed and not identified
as noncases remained provisional. Reviewers also assessed
cancer type and diagnosis date.
Discrepancies or uncertainties were reviewed by the
team and resolved by the clinical specialist in medical oncology/hematology (J.A.K.). The diagnosis date was the earliest
date of a cancer diagnosis in any of the sources.

Additional Validation in Linked Practices
For linked practices, validation started with the identification of provisional cases using the electronic algorithm
www.epidem.com | 309

Margulis et al

Epidemiology • Volume 29, Number 2, March 2018

FIGURE 1. Data source coverage in relation to the study period. GOLD indicates General Practitioner Online Database; HES,
Hospital Episode Statistics; NCDR, National Cancer Data Repository; ONS, Office for National Statistics.

previously described, followed by physician review of medical
profiles. During the period of overlap between data sources
(2004–2010), we used Hospital Episode Statistics and the
National Cancer Data Repository to confirm previously identified cases (patients with cancer records in the General Practitioner Online Database and cancer records in one or both
of these linked data sources) and to identify additional cases
(patients in the General Practitioner Online Database without
cancer records in the General Practitioner Online Database
but with cancer records in Hospital Episode Statistics and/or
the National Cancer Data Repository). Since Hospital Episode
Statistics data are independently audited and cancer registries
perform their own independent case validation using standardized procedures, including review of pathology information,6 all cases identified in Hospital Episode Statistics or the
National Cancer Data Repository were considered confirmed.

Episode Statistics, and/or the National Cancer Data Repository) using proportional Venn diagrams for the combined
study cancers and for individual cancer types. The area of
each segment in these diagrams is proportional to the number
of patients it includes.
Analyses were conducted using SAS 9.3 (Cary, NC:
SAS Institute, Inc.; 2011) and Stata 13.1 (College Station,
TX: StataCorp LP; 2014). The study protocol was registered
in the European Union electronic Register of Post-Authorisation Studies before the study was conducted (Register number
EUPAS5529; http://www.encepp.eu/encepp/viewResource.
htm?id=11107) and was approved by the CPRD’s Independent
Scientific Advisory Committee (protocol 13_142A).

Statistical Analysis

The validation cohort included 50,840 study drug users.
After excluding patients with cancer or HIV before cohort
entry, the electronic search identified 1,486 provisional cancer
cases in the General Practitioner Online Database, 56% from
linked and 44% from nonlinked practices.

Based only on the General Practitioner Online Database
from cases for the entire period, we reported the number of
cancer cases identified using an electronic algorithm, plus
absolute and relative frequencies of case confirmation from
electronic medical profile review, overall and by linkage availability. We reported the frequency of cancer cases identifiable
and not identifiable in the General Practitioner Online Database from linked practices, within the period with complete
overlap of data sources, by patient characteristics, for selected
cancer types. We described the source of each confirmed cancer diagnosis (General Practitioner Online Database, Hospital
310 | www.epidem.com

RESULTS
Participants

Validation of Provisional Cases Using Only the
General Practitioner Online Database, Entire
Study Period
Of the 1,486 provisional cancer cases identified through
an electronic algorithm in the General Practitioner Online Database, 95% were confirmed in the review of patient’s medical profiles (Table). Of the 825 provisional cases from linked practices,
© 2017 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

Epidemiology • Volume 29, Number 2, March 2018

Validation of Common Cancers in UK Primary Care Data

Table. Results of Validation of Provisional Cases Based Only on the General Practitioner Online Database in the Entire Study
Period (2004–2012) in Linked and Nonlinked Practices
All Practices
Identified in GOLD
With Electronic
Algorithm
Cancer Type
Cancer Type
Bladdera
Breast
Colorectal
Corpus uteri
Kidney and renal pelvis
Lung and bronchus
Non-Hodgkin lymphoma
Pancreas
Prostatea
Skin melanoma

Linked Practices

Confirmed
in Review of
Medical Profile

Identified in GOLD
With Electronic
Algorithm

Nonlinked Practices

Confirmed
in Review of
Medical Profile

Identified in GOLD
With Electronic
Algorithm

Confirmed
in Review of
Medical Profile

N

N

%

N

N

%

N

n

%

1,486
179
361
198
44
31
165
47
45
344
71

1,408
170
355
187
44
29
149
46
43
325
60

95
95
98
94
100
94
90
98
96
94
85

825
92
208
106
27
15
87
32
25
196
36

792
89
205
102
27
15
81
31
24
185
33

96
97
99
96
100
100
93
97
96
94
92

661
87
153
92
17
16
78
15
20
148
35

616
81
150
85
17
14
68
15
19
140
27

93
93
98
92
100
88
87
100
95
95
77

a
One patient had codes for bladder and prostate cancer on the same day.
GOLD indicates General Practitioner Online Database.

(i.e., bladder, breast, colorectal, corpus uteri, non-Hodgkin lymphoma, pancreas, and prostate), at least 90% of provisional cases
were confirmed; for lung and kidney cancer and skin melanoma,
77–88% of provisional cases were confirmed.

Source of Cases in Linked Practices Using All
Data Sources, Period of Overlap

FIGURE 2. Origin of cancer cases diagnosed during period of
complete overlap of data sources (2004–2010) in linked practices, by data source, all study cancers combined. GOLD indicates
General Practitioner Online Database; HES, Hospital Episode Statistics; NCDR, National Cancer Data Repository. Note: This figure
represents the 720 confirmed cases in linked practices, regardless of the data source in which the cases were initially identified.
Percentages were calculated using 720 as the denominator.

96% were confirmed; at least 90% of provisional cases were
confirmed for any individual cancer type. Of the 661 provisional
cases in nonlinked practices, 93% were confirmed in the review
of medical patient profiles. For most individual cancer types
© 2017 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

Overall, 720 cancer cases were confirmed in the General Practitioner Online Database, Hospital Episode Statistics,
and/or the National Cancer Data Repository. Of these, 68%
were identifiable in the General Practitioner Online Database,
81% in Hospital Episode Statistics, and 84% in the National
Cancer Data Repository (Figure 2). The completeness of case
recording in the General Practitioner Online Database was
greater for breast cancer and prostate cancer than for other
study cancers (Figure 3).
In the General Practitioner Online Database, more complete identification of study cancer cases was seen in younger
individuals (eTable; http://links.lww.com/EDE/B297 in Supplemental Digital Content), in nonsmokers, and in cancers
diagnosed in 2004–2008. Based on other characteristics, no
substantial variation was apparent for the combined study
cancers or for three cancers for which the General Practitioner
Online Database is less complete: pancreas, lung, and kidney.

DISCUSSION
A very high proportion of provisional cases of cancer
identified in the General Practitioner Online Database by screening for Read diagnosis codes were confirmed through clinical
review of patient profiles or linkage to the National Cancer Data
Repository or Hospital Episode Statistics, but, of these three
www.epidem.com | 311

Margulis et al

Epidemiology • Volume 29, Number 2, March 2018

FIGURE 3. Selected cancers by main
treating physician: percentage of cases
identifiable in the GOLD during the
period of complete overlap of data
sources (2004–2010) in linked practices.
GOLD indicates General Practitioner
Online Database. Note: Each set of three
circles represents confirmed cancer cases
found in the General Practitioner Online
Database (orange circle) and in Hospital
Episode Statistics and the National Cancer Data Repository (black circles). Areas
are proportional to the number of cases
found in each source.

data sources, no single source contained records of all confirmed study cancer cases. Completeness of cancer recording
in the General Practitioner Online Database is higher for breast
and prostate cancers—diseases for which general practitioners
often prescribe ongoing drug therapy—than for other cancers
that are usually treated by specialists. We observed more complete case ascertainment in younger individuals, but we did
not identify patient groups for which the General Practitioner
Online Database contains all cancer cases.
Multiple studies have examined the completeness of
cancer recording in data sources available for research in the
United Kingdom. A discussion of methods and findings in our
and other studies is presented in the supplemental information.
Cancer ascertainment from practices whose data allow
linkage to Hospital Episode Statistics and the National Cancer
Data Repository is more complete than from nonlinked practices. Whether this would affect relative risks in safety studies depends on whether completeness of case ascertainment
is differential for patients with versus without the exposure of
interest. Even without such bias, a lower proportion of identified cases of a given cancer would be expected to yield more
imprecise effect estimates.
A limitation of this study is that we identified cancer
cases in the General Practitioner Online Database with an
algorithm that used Read diagnosis codes exclusively (i.e.,
without morphology or treatment codes). While the coding system includes codes for morphology (e.g., Read code
BB5..11, “[M] Adenocarcinoma”) and treatment (e.g., Read
312 | www.epidem.com

code 8BAD.00, “Chemotherapy”), only diagnosis codes consistently permit identification of the type of cancer (needed
in this study). Instead, in medical profile review, morphology and treatment codes were used, along with codes related
to review of cancer care, to confirm the presence of cancer. Strengths of this validation study include the meticulous process for patient profile review and confirmation of
case status, including calibration of the assessment process
before starting the patient profile review to decrease interrater variability.
In conclusion, cancer case identification in the General Practitioner Online Database is sensitive to features
of the case ascertainment algorithm such as the use of
free-text comments and the type of codes included (e.g.,
diagnosis, morphology, treatment). Nearly all cancers with
diagnosis codes in the General Practitioner Online Database (similarly for linked and nonlinked practices) were
confirmed. While completeness of the General Practitioner
Online Database was high for breast and prostate cancer,
a substantial proportion of other cancers will be missed if
Hospital Episode Statistics and the National Cancer Data
Repository are not used.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Jennifer Bartsch for her help with programming,
Christine Bui and Alicia Gilsenan for their help managing the
project, Adele Monroe for her editorial help, Jason Mathes for
his help preparing figures (all from RTI International); Kwame
© 2017 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

Epidemiology • Volume 29, Number 2, March 2018

Appenteng and Milbhor D´Silva for their input at all stages of
the study (both from Astellas); and Clinical Practice Research
Datalink research staff for their support to the program.
REFERENCES
1. Dregan A, Moller H, Murray-Thomas T, et al. Validity of cancer diagnosis in a primary care database compared with linked cancer registrations in England. Population-based cohort study. Cancer Epidemiol.
2012;36:425–429.
2. Boggon R, van Staa TP, Chapman M, et al. Cancer recording and mortality in the General Practice Research Database and linked cancer registries.
Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf. 2013;22:168–175.

© 2017 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

Validation of Common Cancers in UK Primary Care Data

3. Rañopa M, Douglas I, van Staa T, et al. The identification of incident cancers in UK primary care databases: a systematic review.
Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf. 2015;24:11–18.
4. Kaye JA, Margulis AV, Fortuny J, et al. Cancer incidence after initiation of
antimuscarinic medications for overactive bladder in the United Kingdom:
evidence for protopathic bias. Pharmacotherapy. 2017 Jun;37(6):673683. doi: 10.1002/phar.1932.
5. Herrett E, Gallagher AM, Bhaskaran K, et al. Data resource profile: Clinical Practice Research Datalink (CPRD). Int J Epidemiol.
2015;44:827–836.
6. Jensen OM, Parkin DM, MacLennan R, Muir CS, Skeet RG, eds. Cancer
Registration: Principles and Methods. IARC Publication No. 95. Lyon,
France: World Health Organization, International Agency for Research on
Cancer (IARC), and International Association of Cancer Registries; 1991.

www.epidem.com | 313

